---
layout: post
title: "LunyScript API: User Extensions"
date: 2026-02-02
categories: [design]
tags: [development, architecture]
featured_image: ../media/ExtendingLunyScriptApi.png
---

# LunyScript API: User Extensions

I have published a design article about [how to extend the LunyScript API](/docs/ExtendingLunyScriptApi). I'll provide a brief summary here.

## A Basic LunyScript

First, an up-to-date example of the current LunyScript API. 

This script logs a string every update. It's complete as is, nothing missing. To make it work, the user merely has to have an object of the same name `LogUpdate` in the active scene and it will start logging every update.

    public class LogUpdate : LunyScript.LunyScript
    {
        public override void Build()
        {
            When.Self.Updates(Debug.Log("updating"));
        }
    }

There are generally three ways to add your own API to LunyScript in such a way that it feels "native".

## Static Factory Class (easiest)

To share scripts with others frictionless, you can write a static class with API methods without a namespace:

    public static class MyExtension
    {
       public static IScriptActionBlock DoSomething(string str) => DoSomethingBlock.Create(str);
    }

This API is automatically usable in any LunyScript-derived class in the same project:

    // Usage in a script
    public class DoSomething : LunyScript.LunyScript
    {
        public override void Build()
        {
            When.Self.Updates(MyExtension.DoSomething("Hello, Engine!"));
        }
    }

Static factories are very beginner-friendly and share easily. 

However they do appear everywhere in autocompletion suggestions (Intellisense). In fact, users can call the static method even outside of LunyScript instances.

## Common Base Class ('internal use' only)

For a frightening large number of developers, subclassing is the first (and only) thing they can think of. Please [learn about composition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composition_over_inheritance) if you inherit-by-default. ;)

The subclassing approach follows the same fluent API pattern LunyScript uses via properties and stack-allocated API implementations: 

    public class MyLunyScript : LunyScript.LunyScript
    {
        // this is the name of your Api
        public MyExtensionApi MyExtension => new();
    }

The implementation of the API is in a `readonly struct` (no garbage) and ideally in the same file if not a nested type of `MyLunyScript`:

    public readonly struct MyExtensionApi
    {
        // an extension method, they have to return an interface derived from IScriptBlock
        public IScriptActionBlock DoSomething(string str) => DoSomethingBlock.Create(str);
    }

You can then subclass from MyLunyScript and use your own API:

    // Usage in a script
    public class DoSomething : MyLunyScript
    {
        public override void Build()
        {
            When.Self.Updates(MyExtension.DoSomething("Hello, Engine!"));
        }
    }

The subclassing solution is **not sharing-friendly** and requires all extension code to route through a single base type. 

Its a workable solution for a studio or faculty at most, but forcing other users to inherit from **your** base class is intrusive and locks them in. 

Please don't share base-class API extensions with the public! 

## Interface Mixins (recommended)

This is the preferred, professional way to extend LunyScript. Instead of a subclass defining the API property you now write an equally straightforward interface tagged with the `[LunyScriptExtension]` attribute for the Roslyn generator:

    [LunyScriptExtension] // <== declares interface to contain fluent API properties
    public interface IMyExtension
    {
        MyExtensionApi MyExtension => new MyExtensionApi();
    }

The API implementation remains the same but is tagged with the `[LunyScriptApi]` attribute:

    [LunyScriptApi] // <== declares struct to contain API extension methods
    public readonly struct MyExtensionApi
    {
        public IScriptActionBlock DoSomething(string str) => DoSomethingBlock.Create(str);
    }

You can then use the extension API by implementing the `IMyExtension` interface in a `partial` LunyScript-derived class. API usage is identical to the first two examples thanks to Roslyn generators:

    // 'partial' keyword required for Roslyn generator
    public partial class MyScript : LunyScript.LunyScript, IMyExtension // <== extension interface
    {
        public override void Build()
        {
            When.Self.Updates(MyExtension.DoSomething("Hello, Engine!")); // same as earlier!
        }
    }

Roslyn will inject an `Inventory` property into `MyScript` to make use of the extension API feel 'native'. The property casts `this` to the `IMyExtension` interface and returns the API type:

        // property generated by Roslyn, injected into MyScript:
        MyExtensionApi MyExtension => ((IMyExtension)this).MyExtension;

In scripts not using the IMyExtension interface, the MyExtension API will not appear in autocompletion suggestions. The `partial` keyword is only required when adding an extension interface, and will have a custom error message and code fix if it's missing.

These interface and API implementations can easily be shared with others, and they can choose per script which extension APIs to use. Highly recommended for public sharing! 

## Conclusion

I could have just mentioned the preferred solution but I wanted to get across the opportunities for teaching LunyScript provides even outside the scope of its API. With just these examples you can cover a wide range of design, C# language and user experience (IDE) topics:

- fluent API design
- composition vs inheritance (OOP coupling, diamond problem, by example: Godot vs others)
- interface mixins and why interfaces require casting 'this'
- static classes, static factories, C# extension methods
- UX type discovery (autocompletion, not completing 'this.', static == visible everywhere)
- abstract base classes, nested types, namespaces
- struct vs class => stack vs heap allocations

I'm looking forward to those instructive lessons. :)
